True/False
1. The median is the average of a set of data.
- F

2. Standard deviation measures how spread out a data set is.
- T

3. Arrays are usually heterogeneous, but lists are homogeneous.
-F

4. A Python list cannot grow and shrink in size.
- F

5. Unlike strings, Python lists are not mutable.
- F

6. A list must contain at least one item.
- F

7. Items can be removed from a list with the del operator.
- T

8. A tuple is similar to an immutable list.
- T

9. A Python dictionary is a kind of sequence. 
- F


Multiple Choice
1. Where mathematicians use subscripting, computer programmers use
a) slicing b) indexing c) Python d) caffeine
-B

2. Which of the following is not a built-in sequence operation in Python?
a) sorting b) concatenation c) slicing d) repetition
- D

3. The method that adds a single item to the end of a list is
a) extend b) add c) plus d) append
- D

4. Which of the following is not a Python list method?
a) index b) insert c) get d) pop
- C

5. Which of the following is not a characteristic of a Python list?
a) It is an object. b) It is a sequence.
c) It can hold objects. d) It is immutable.
- D

6. Which of the following expressions correctly tests if x is even?
a) x % 2 == 0 b) even(x) c) not odd(x) d) x % 2 == x
- A 

7. The parameter xbar in std.Dev is what?
a) median b) mode c) spread d) mean
- D

8. What keyword parameter is used to send a key-function to the sort method?
a) reverse b) reversed c) cmp d) key
- D

9. Which of the following is not a dictionary method?
a) get b) keys c) sort d) clear
- C

10. The items dictionary method returns a(n)
a) int b) sequence of tuples c) bool d) dictionary  
 - B

Discussion
1. Given the initial statements
s1 - [2 ,1, 4,3] 
s2 - ['c,'a','b']
show the result of evaluating each of the following sequence expressions: 
a) s1 + s2 = [2 ,1, 4,3, 'c, 'a' , 'b']
b) 3 * s1 + 2 * s2 = [2 ,1, 4,3,2 ,1, 4,3,2 ,1, 4,3, 'c, 'a' , 'b', 'c, 'a' , 'b']
c) s1 [1] = 1
d) s 1 [1 : 3] = [1,4]
e) s1 + s2 [-1] = [2 ,1, 4,3, 'b']??? Error int + string? but part b adds them both up ok

2. Given the same initial statements as in the previous problem, show the values of s 1 and s2 after executing each of the following statements. Treat
each part independently (i.e., assume that s1 and s2 start with their original values each time).
a) s1.remove(2) - [1, 4,3] ['c,'a','b'] -? physically removing 2 and not the 2nd element?
b) s1.sort() - [1,2,3,4] ['a','b','c']
c) s1.append([s2.index('b')]) - [2 ,1, 4,3,[2]] ['c,'a','b']
d) s2.pop(s1.pop(2)) - out of range error
        - s1.pop(2) = [2,1,3] - popped 4
        - s2.pop(4) = error
e) s2.insert(s1[0],'d') 
        - s1(0) = 2
        - s2.insert(2,'d') = ['c,'a','d','b']

Programming Exercises
1. Modify the statistics program from this chapter so that client programs
have more flexibility in computing the mean and/ or standard deviation.
Specifically, redesign the library to have the following functions:
mean(nums) Returns the mean of numbers in nums.
stdDev(nums) Returns the standard deviation of nums.
meanStdDev (nums) Returns both the mean and standard deviation of nums.
2. Extend the gpasort program so that it allows the user to sort a file of
students based on GPA, name, or credits. Your program should prompt for
the input file, the field to sort on, and the output file.
3. Extend your solution to the previous problem by adding an option to sort
the list in either ascending or descending order.
4. Give the program from the previous exercise(s) a graphical interface. You
should have Entrys for the input and output file names and a button for
each sorting order. Bonus: Allow the user to do multiple sorts and add a
button for quitting
5. Most languages do not have the flexible built-in list (array) operations
that Python has. Write an algorithm for each of the following Python
operations and test your algorithm by writing it up in a suitable function. For example, as a function, reverse (myList ) should do the same as
my List . reverse ( ) . Obviously, you are not allowed to use the corresponding Python method to implement your function.
a) count (my List , x) (like my List . count (x) )
b) isin(myList , x) (like x in myList))
c) index (my List , x) (like my List . index (x) )
d) reverse (myList) (like myList . reverse ())
e) sort (myList) (like my List . sort ())
6. Write and test a function shuffle (my List ) that scrambles a list into a
random order, like shuffling a deck of cards.
7. Write and test a function innerProd(x , y) that computes the inner product
of two (same length) lists. The inner product of x and y is computed as:
n-1
L XiYi
i=O
8. Write and test a function removeDuplicates (somelist) that removes duplicate values from a list.
9. One disadvantage of passing a function to the list sort method is that it
makes the sorting slower, since this function is called repeatedly as Python
compares various items.
An alternative to creating a special key function is to create a "decorated" list that will sort in the desired order using the standard Python
ordering. For example, to sort Student objects by GPA, we could first
create a list of tuples [ (gpaO , StudentO) , (gpa1 , Student 1) , .. ] and
then sort this list without passing a key function. These tuples will get
sorted into GPA order. The resulting list can then be traversed to rebuild a
list of student objects in GPA order. Redo the gpasort program using this
approach. 
10. The Sieve of Eratosthenes is an elegant algorithm for finding all of the
prime numbers up to some limit n. The basic idea is to first create a list
of numbers from 2 to n. The first number is removed from the list, and
announced as a prime number, and all multiples of this number up to n
are removed from the list. This process continues until the list is empty.
For example, if we wished to find all the primes up to 10, the list
would originally contain 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. The 2 is removed
and announced to be prime. Then 4, 6, 8, and 10 are removed, since
they are multiples of 2. That leaves 3, 5, 7, 9. Repeating the process,
3 is announced as prime and removed, and 9 is removed because it is a
multiple of 3. That leaves 5 and 7. The algorithm continues by announcing
that 5 is prime and removing it from the list. Finally, 7 is announced and
removed, and we're done.
Write a program that prompts a user for n and then uses the sieve
algorithm to find all the primes less than or equal to n.
11. Write an automated censor program that reads in the text from a file and
creates a new file where all of the four-letter words have been replaced by
11 **** 11
• You can ignore punctuation, and you may assume that no words
in the file are split across multiple lines.
12. Extend the program from the previous exercise to accept a file of censored
words as another input. The words in the original file that appear in the
censored words file are replaced by a string of 11 * 11 s with length equal to
the number of characters in the censored word.
13. Write a program that creates a list of card objects (see Programming Exercise 11 from Chapter 10) and prints out the cards grouped by suit and in
rank order within suit. Your program should read the list of cards from a
file, where each line in the file represents a single card with the rank and
suit separated by a space. Hint: First sort by rank and then by suit.
14. Extend the previous program to analyze a list of five cards as a poker hand.
After printing the cards, the program categorizes accordingly.
Royal Flush 10, jack, queen, king, ace, all of the same suit.
Straight Flush Five ranks in a row, all of the same suit.
Four of a Kind Four of the same rank.
Full House Three of one rank and two of another. 
Flush Five cards of the same suit.
Straight Five ranks in a row.
Three of a kind Three of one rank (but not a full house or four of a kind) .
Two pair Two each of two different ranks.
Pair Two of the same rank (but not two pair, three or four of a kind).
X High If none of the previous categories fit, X is the value of the highest
rank. For example, if the largest rank is 1 1, the hand is 'jack high."
15. Create a class Deck that represents a deck of cards. Your class should have
the following methods:
constructor Creates a new deck of 52 cards in a standard order.
shuffie Randomizes the order of the cards.
deal Card Returns a single card from the top of the deck and removes the
card from the deck.
cardsLeft Returns the number of cards remaining in the deck.
Test your program by having it deal out a sequence of n cards from a
shuffled deck where n is a user input. You could also use your deck object
to implement a Blackjack simulation where the pool of cards is finite. See
Programming Exercises 8 and 9 in Chapter 9.
16. Create a class called StatSet that can be used to do simple statistical
calculations. The methods for the class are:
__ init __ ( self ) Creates a StatSet with no data in it.
415
addNumber ( self , x) x is a number. Adds the value x to the statSet.
mean(self ) Returns the mean of the numbers in this statSet.
median( self ) Returns the median of the numbers in this statSet.
stdDev( self ) Returns the standard deviation of the numbers in this statSet.
count ( self ) Returns the count of numbers in this statSet.
min(self) Returns the smallest value in this statSet.
max (self ) Returns the largest value in this statSet.
Test your class with a program similar to the simple statistics program
from this chapter
17. In graphics applications, it is often useful to group separate pieces of
a drawing together into a single object. For example, a face might be
drawn from individual shapes, but then positioned as a whole group.
Create a new class GraphicsGroup that can be used for this purpose. A
GraphicsGroup will manage a list of graphics objects and have the following methods:
__ init __ ( self , anchor) anchor is a Point. Creates an empty group with
the given anchor point.
get Anchor ( self ) Returns a clone of the anchor point.
addObj ect ( self , gObj ect) gObj ect is a graphics object. Adds gObj ect
to the group.
move ( self , dx , dy) Moves all of the objects in the group (including the
anchor point) .
draw(self , win) Draws all the objects in the group into win. The anchor
point is not drawn.
undraw( self ) Undraws all the objects in the group.
Use your new class to write a program that draws some simple picture
with multiple components and moves it to wherever the user clicks.
18. Extend the random walk program from Chapter 9 (Programming Exercise 12). Consider the sidewalk as a sequence of squares, and each step
moves the walker one square. Your program should keep track of how
many times each square of the sidewalk is stepped on. Start your walker
in the middle of a sidewalk of length n where n is a user input, and continue the simulation until it drops off one of the ends. Then print out the
counts of how many times each square was landed on.
19. Create and test a Set class to represent a classical set. Your sets should
support the following methods:
Set (elements) Creates a set (elements is the initial list of items in the
set).
addElement (x) Adds x to the set.
deleteElement (x) Removes x from the set, if present. If x is not in the
set, the set is left unchanged.
member (x) Returns true if x is in the set and false otherwise.
intersection( set2) Returns a new set containing just those elements
that are common to this set and set2.
union( set2) Returns a new set containing all of elements that are in this
set, set2, or both.
subtract ( set2) Returns a new set containing all the elements of this set
that are not in set2.
By the way, sets are so useful that Python actually has a built-in set
datatype. While you may want to investigate Python's set, you should not
use it here. The point of this exercise is to help you develop your skills in
algorithm development using lists and dictionaries.
20. Extend the cannonball animation from the chapter to allow the user to
adjust the initial height of the launcher. The height adjustment should be
handled similar to the way angle and velocity are. Pick a pair of keys of
your own choosing for adjusting the height up and down.
21. Extend the cannonball animation example to include target objects. A
target is a randomly sized rectangle that is placed somewhere downrange
in the animation. When a target is hit, it disappears and a new target is
generated. Further extensions could involve moving targets and keeping
track of the number of hits. 
